my first guest tonight is a man who
helped bring Israelis and Palestinians
as close to peace as anyone Yosi bin is
considered the architect of the 1994
Oslo Accords between Israel and the
Palestinian Liberation Organization he
served as Minister of Justice and
religious Affairs under prime minister
ahud Barack and since then he has
remained committed to a path to peace
just last year he supported a proposal
for an Israeli Palestinian Confederation
and I a that seemingly fell on deaf ears
Mr bin it's good to have you with us
tonight um this week thank you for
having me when you look at what happened
at the the UN this week when the UN
Secretary General said that the October
7th attack did not happen in a vacuum
that prompted Israel's un ambassador to
demand that the Secretary General resign
what did you think when that
[Music]
happened well the Antonio gutes is a
somebody who supports Israel who
believes in Israel who believes in peace
who was shocked by what he W but what he
saw in the region and regretfully he was
rejected when he asked to visit Israel
few days ago I don't know why the
Israeli government decided to do
something like that he made a huge
mistake by saying that the attack the
the crazy crazy Isis kind of attack
against babies and and women and and old
people was not in a vacuum because it
was not a situation that in in which the
Hamas people are saying we would like to
have peace with Israel we would like to
H divide the land we would like to live
in peace and it is impossible and
because they are unemployed and and
because they are under Israel indirect
rule they had to do something no this is
not the situation that perhaps was the
situation of the first intifa of the
Palestinians against Israel in
87 what happened is something which is
totally crazy it is not written anywhere
and rather than totally rejecting it he
gave the impression although he did not
say that he he understood what Hamas did
but if it was not in a vacuum then you
give some kind of legitimacy the demand
that he would he would resign is a a big
mistake of Israel I don't think that he
deserves such such a an attitude of
Israel towards him let me ask you uh
this week on Wednesday in The Times of
Israel the Israeli writer Yosi klin
halevi wrote to blame the occupation and
its consequences wholly on Israel is to
dismiss the history of Israeli PE peace
offers and Palestinian
rejection has the world forgotten what
you and others achieved with the Oslo
Accords in
1994 yo you you know such a question to
which the the answer is is
positive could be asked and should be
asked Visa the PLO the PLO is our
partner and we had ups and downs with
the PLO Hamas is something else Hamas
doesn't want anything from us they don't
want to to divide the land they don't
want to have peace with Israel and this
is why it was a mistake to allow Hamas
to run in the elections of
2006 and to remain in the leadership of
Gaza despite of all the the violent
encounters that we have with it we had
with each other but the point is that
the Israeli right saw Hamas as a
better interlocutor or neighbor than the
PLO because the PLO wanted and wants to
divide the land this is the major issue
between us and them yeah and rather than
understanding that this was also the
interest of Israel they preferred an
interor who didn't want anything from us
but that we will disappear Mr B I I want
to I want to come back to Hamas just a
second but I want to stick with history
for a moment the the Oslo Accords they
did not mention the establishment of a
Palestinian state was that a mistake is
that something you regret
now this was a request of the
Palestinians they said we don't want to
mention the Palestinian State as one of
the issues that should be solved towards
the permanent agreement there were five
issues like borders refugees Jerusalem
and not the Palestinian State and they
explained it because they said this is
our right for
self-determination and we don't need
from you any negotiations of the
principle of the Palestinian state so it
is not that Israel said no way we we
should talk about the Palestinian State
I mean all the negotiators knew that we
were talking about a or or thinking
about a Palestinian State there is no
other solution what they're going to to
have a club I mean it is a state but it
is not mentioned because they said that
they didn't want to to discuss it they
didn't want to negotiate it because they
were that was their right this is the
reason so the the the question is
whether it was possible to get in 93 a
permanent agreement rather than an
interim agreement of five years and when
I understood that we had had Partners in
Oslo the the PLO people were people with
whom I believe we could strike a deal I
went to Rabin to the Prime Minister and
I said to him Mr Prime Minister I
believe that we should not we should not
try to have a five-year agreement right
now there is an opportunity which may be
very rare to go for the permanent
agreement so that the extremist on both
sides will not have a the opportunity to
thwart our
efforts he explained that he he he
preferred to go along the Madrid
conference guidelines the American
guidelines of an interim agreement for
five years rather than getting D
directly to a permanent agreement which
may not succeed the negotiations may not
succeed for a permanent agreement and I
believe that this was a very big mistake
Mr let me bring it up now to the
president in an interview last month
about three weeks before the October 7th
attacks you gave an interview to the
Spanish newspaper elpis and you were
quoted as saying the the Palestinians
tragically have become resigned to their
limited options and this disappointment
fuels The Divide between Hamas and fata
would would you say that today
considering This Global chorus of
support that we are seeing now for the
Palestinians in
Gaza well this support is is very
problematic you know the people who are
who belong to the PLO are the biggest
enemies of Kamas Kamas as you know threw
them from the roofs of Gaza in
2007 when they took Gaza by force it's I
mean even now when we are trying to
think about what should be be in the
morning after the the end of the war who
should rule Gaza if Israel succeeds to
prevent the Hamas from continuing and
Rule Gaza then the the PLO is not in a
hurry to get there to to get back to to
Gaza because of the animosity towards
them so even when you hear that in
Jordan and in other places people are
saying oh or or comparing
what the Hamas did on that black
Saturday few weeks ago and and and what
Israel in its retaliation does you know
that if you know the people you know
their motivations you know that Hamas is
an enemy of of many many forces in the
Middle East who would like to see Israel
distancing them from governing the the
Gaza Strip but they cater to their
public opinions and this is a problem
you you said before the October 7th
attacks that that the Jewish settlements
in the West Bank were one of the biggest
obstacles to peace the current
government the one that was in place
before October 7th it was the first ever
in Israel to make annexation of the West
Bank a stated objective in its Coalition
agreement I mean that had to really
sting for someone like
you
well I I I I believe that the the
current government of Israel led by
Netanyahu is a a big obstacle for Peace
by
itself and encouraging more settlements
or more housing units in the current
settlements is a is a very very big
obstacle and one of the ideas that I
suggested but not not only me it is a
group of Palestinians and Israelis the
Palestinian group is led by Dr Hiba
huseni is to have as you mentioned
before a confederation the Holy Land
Confederation of Israel and Palestine in
the future which will allow all those
settlers who will find themselves in the
Palestinian State once we draw a border
between Israel and Palestine to remain
there in in Palestine as residents of
Palestine and citizens of Israel while
the same number of Palestinian citizens
who would like to live in Israel will be
allowed to do that as permanent
residents so then you can really ER take
off the table the issue of evacuating
hundreds of thousands of of settlers and
if if that is removed I believe that the
way for an agreement will be open and
since sometimes in history or many times
in his history the efforts for peace
were accelerated as a result of Wars I
hope that this very sad situation when
we see ourselves now fighting in Gaza
and of course civilians are are hit and
suffer and and and pay the price even if
we are telling them in advance you have
to leave their homes even that is not
such a big oros positive announcement
for them I believe that it might the the
current situation the current tragic
situation may be an acceleration to
world's peace if we are wise enough to
use this opportunity well that is a a
positive way to end our segment Mr bin
unfortunately we're out of time but we
certainly appreciate you taking the time
to share your thoughts with us tonight
Mr Yi bin thank
you thank you very much